[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Anne Summers
and I'm on the faculty
at the University of
Georgia, in Athens.
And I teach microbiology.
And I do research
using microorganisms.
I've been working for--
oh, well-- let's say,
since 1969 on mercury
as a subject of interest.
I began working
on this when I was
a doctoral student at Washington
University in St. Louis.
Up until the late '80s,
I had worked on mercury
strictly as a phenomenon
of bacterial resistance.
And it was a nice model system.
You could do all kinds of
physiology and biochemistry.
And it was fun to do
and easy to work on.
And we had lots of interest
from NIH and NSF in supporting.
And I remember,
very distinctly, it
was a winter
afternoon in December,
I think, that I happened to
flip open a copy of "The FASEB
Journal," which is a
general life sciences,
medically-oriented journal.
And I saw this paper which
had a picture of a sheet
with radiography demonstration
of all the mercury that
was in this sheet.
And I thought, wow,
that's really strange.
And it was their very
first paper which
was published in "The FASEB J."
And showed that when you
put fillings into an animal,
that the mercury
goes everywhere.
In some places,
more than others,
as has been pointed out in
the jaw, and in the kidney,
and so forth.
And particularly,
in the g.I. tract--
in the gut, in other words.
And so I picked up the
phone at that point
and I called Fritz
Lorscheider and I
said I'd found his
study very interesting.
And that I'd worked on
mercury and bacteria.
And I asked him if
he knew anything
about mercury-resistant
bacteria.
And he said he'd never
heard of such a thing.
So we had a conversation
that ended up
in establishing a
plan to go forward
to collaborate with him
because they'd already
begun to work on the monkeys.
They did all of the
housing of the animals,
the feeding of the animals,
and so forth up in Calgary.
And they put the fillings in,
in a regular dental oratory
and so forth that
they had there.
And then they sent us the
samples of monkey feces,
freshly collected each day
or actually, twice a week.
We then immediately did
bacteriological work on them
that allowed us to see--
the two things that we were
particularly interested in were
how many of the microorganisms
that we were cultivating--
and cultivated
three different types of
bacteria from the monkey feces.
And we had a way to figure
out how many of them
were mercury-resistant
and what proportion were
mercury-resistant of the total.
And what proportion also carried
antibiotic resistance genes.
And the reason we were
interested in asking that
question was because we already
knew-- the whole world knew--
that the genes for
mercury-resistance-- well,
I should say the whole
world of microbiology.
Well, I should actually
say the small world people
interested in
antibiotic resistance
in bacteria knew that the
genes for mercury resistance
were carried on bacterial
plasmids, which also carried
antibiotic resistance genes.
And now bacterial plasmids
are a little supernumerary
chromosomes that bacteria
can exchange with each other,
sort of like little
apps that you
can exchange with your
friends that allow
you to be resistant to things.
And so the mercury
resistance genes
being on the same plasmids as
antibiotic resistance genes,
if you expose a bacterial
community to antibiotics,
of course, that will cause
the bacteria to persist
as antibiotic
resistance bacteria.
And people were
concerned about that
already because they knew
that overuse of antibiotics
was causing a
prevalence and spread
of antibiotic multi-resistance
in humans, which is a problem.
And we were interested
in this experiment
to see whether or not
exposure of animals
with their microorganisms
to mercury, resulting
in the exposure of the
microbes themselves to mercury
would cause a persistence
and prevalence.
Not only of the mercury
resistance, but also
the antibiotic resistance
because of genetic linkage.
If you pick the
mercury resistance,
you can carry along the
antibiotic resistance, as well.
So that was the purpose
of those experiments.
And that paper was published
in "Antimicrobial Agents
and Chemotherapy"
in April of '93.
And it made the
case that exposure
of these primates, which
are a reasonably good model
for human biology and
microbiology, to mercury
resulted in a
proliferation of microbes
in their gut that
had both mercury
resistance and multiple
antibiotic resistances.
And that in the early monkeys
that we worked with them on,
the fillings were taken
out after two months.
And so we could see a decline
in mercury-resistant bacteria
and antibiotic multi-resistant
bacteria after that period.
So that clearly associated
them with the exposure
to mercury of the
microbiota of the animals
that we were looking at.
And the animals didn't have any
exposure to any other mercury.
And in a couple
of the cases, they
were working with
radioactive mercury.
So it wasn't an issue of getting
the mercury from their diet
or anything like that.
But they also were not,
of course, eating fish.
And we arranged with them ahead
of time that the monkeys were--
the kind of animal
chow that they
had had no antibiotics in it.
Because there are some
laboratory chows which
are amended with antibiotics
so that the animals will not
come down with
something while they're
doing an experiment
on something else.
So we have data on the
development of mercury
and multiple antibiotic
resistance in the normal
flora-- and that included
both the oral flora,
as well as the g.I. tract
flora in these animals--
that had amalgam fillings.
And the only source of mercury
was from the amalgam fillings.
And so in all those cases,
there was a proliferation
of antibiotic multi-resistance,
along with mercury resistance
subsequent to the
installation of the fillings.
And it was statistically
significant.
We did statistics
on those data and it
was a statistically
significant difference
after the installation
of the amalgams,
for both the mercury resistance
and the antibiotic resistance.
[WHOOSH]